---
layout: post
title: Raspberry Pi as a midi sequencer
date: 2023/11/1
---

<!--- # Raspberry Pi as a midi sequencer --->
Pi4's role is to be a midi playing box for the electric piano. A Gear4Music SDP-3 which has nice weighted keys and hammer action, but not very nice acoustic piano.
I can run fluidsynth on Pi and `aconnect` the midi keyboard to that.  The keyboard also has an inbuilt usb soundcard which shows up on the `Pi4` as `hw:3,0`.

My goal is to turn Pi4 into a simple device which I just plug-in and it acts as a replacment voice for the SDP-3

- `aplay -l` shows the available output sound devices.
- The SDP-3 shows up as device #3, Unless the keyboard is plugged in when `Pi4` boots up
> - how to fix this?
## Status
As things stand at end of Oct23, in branch `pulse` of the [repository](https://github.com/siddalp-actual/sdpFluid), I have a system where fluidsynth starts when the keyboard is plugged in, latency is good, restart after keyboard power-off works.

## Progress...
The sections below document my findings, what works, what doesn't and a few tangential forays.  See my sdpFluid repository for configuration file changes.

### USB detect
When USB keyboard is plugged in, start fluidsynth and do the keyboard connection to it.
> I've discovered that rather than `aconnect`, I can use `-m alsa_seq` to get `fluidsynth` to open the midi keyboard for input.
> making some progress with udev rules
- `udevadm info -q path -n <device>` shows a `udev` device name for a path - eg /dev/midi2
- `udevadm test <path>` shows the rules which will fire for that path.
- RUN+={pgm name} will run a program as a result of the rule firing
>> NB they must be named `thing.rule` !
> plug-in or power-on SDP-3 causes a lot of ACTION add events for SUBSYSTEM usb
>> I think I might do better listening for soundcards being added than raw USB adds.
### USB Detect - Take 2
After a bit of reading I've moved in radical new direction with this and getting lots of success.

In outline, we set up a `systemd` service for fluidsynth (one already exists in pi - maybe from fluidsynth or pulseaudio install?
A udev rule causes this service to be started when the device is plugged in.
```
ACTION=="change", SUBSYSTEM=={sound}, ATTRS{idVendor}=="17c8", ATTRS{idProduct}=="f07f", ENV{PS_KEYBOARD}="SDP-3", TAG+="systemd", ENV{SYSTEMD_USER_WANTS}="fluidsynth.service"
```
The key magic here is TAG which tells systemd to be interested in the event and SYSTEMD_USER_WANTS which tells systemd to start fluidsynth as a user service.

> Removal [https://unix.stackexchange.com/questions/528803/systemd-doesnt-stop-the-service-when-the-device-is-removed]
>> Net of this is to add `StopWhenUnneeeded=true` to the `.service` file (aka unit)

I also took this a step further and created a `fluidsynth@.service` template.  This is started from the udev rule specifying "fluidsynth@%number.service"
The `%number` here,  picks up the number of the card, and we effectively pass in a parameter of the card number, which can then be accessed in the ExecStart with the %i operator.
```
-o alsa.hardware.device="hw:%i,0"
```
So when pi is booted with the USB plugged in and active, it appears as card 0 and the activated service would be `fluidsynth@0.service`.

**NB**: it is necessary to activate the service with
`systemctl --user enable fluidsynth@`
> I had lots of trouble with this because I'd copied the `/etc/systemd/user/fluidsynth.service` to `fluidsynth@.service`, the enable command makes symlinks in the /etc/systemd/ tree, and my '@' version of the file was in the place where a link needed to be made and so couldn't be...

### Restart
After ~30mins of inactivity, the SDP-3 powers down.  I've persuaded `fluidsynth` to stop in this circumstance,
by adding `StopWhenUnneeded=True` to the `fluidsynth.service` definition for systemd.

However, when I turn SDP-3 on again, the udev rule fires again, starts `fluidsynth` which connects to the midi keyboard ok, but fails to connect to the USB soundcard piece - it seems device hw:3,0 is in use, and `lsof` suggests by pulseaudio.

### Get fluidsynth to use pulseaudio output rather than raw alsa
Try starting fluidsynth using pulseaudio, eg
-o audio.pulseaudio.device=alsa_output.usb-USB_Device_USB_Device-00.analog-stereo

(use `pact list sinks short`)
has tons of latency

Need to `pactl unload-module` then 
```
pactl load-module module-alsa-card device_id="3" name="usb-USB_Device_USB_Device-00" card_name="alsa_card.usb-USB_Device_USB_Device-00" namereg_fail=false tsched=no fixed_latency_range=yes ignore_dB=no deferred_volume=yes use_ucm=yes avoid_resampling=no card_properties="module-udev-detect.discovered=1" fragments=1 fragment_size=15
27
```
The fixed_latency_range stops `pulseaudio` from adjusting the fragment number and size of a buffer over-run or under-run happens.  

This sorts out the latency, just need to make it happen automatically.  After tons of trawling, I've found PULSE_MODARGS.  Add this to the udev rule with `ENV{PULSE_MODARGS}="stuff"` to get `stuff` added to the modules parameters when the `module-alsa-card` gets loaded.

(I also discovered that `udev` can pass in an environment variable, `PULSE_NAME` to give the `pulseaudio` device a more meaningful name.

Unfortunately, PULSE_MODARGS was only added in PulseAudio V15 and Raspberry Pi Buster version of Debian comes with 14.something.

Install Pulse V16 on pi4 from tar file.  

With this, I know that the module parameters are being picked up from `udev` because with `fixed_latency_range=yes` passed in, sound is ruined - the piano sounds like a weird synth sound with long attack and decay (slowed-down?).  However, on the bright side, Pulse 16 with tsched=yes does seem to be a _LOT_ better from a latency perspective - there are a few glitches in the first 10s of seconds of playing as it seems to tune the buffer sizes (from messages in the log).  **BUT** these parameters do not seem to show up in `pactl list-modules` output.

## Still to do
### Change midi instrument
If I set up fluidsynth with a couple of different instruments, eg
```
select 0 1 0 1  < voice 1 of inst 1 on channel 0
select 1 2 0 1  < voice 1 of inst 2 on channel 1
```
Then changing the voice on the keyboard, changes the instrument played
> BUT I can't switch it back - What's going on???

> `aconnect -i` shows midi input ports

> Using 'aseqdump -p <port>` dumps the midi events, I can see that when a different instrument is selected a Program Change on midi channel 0 to program 0 is sent.  This is followed by some controller change messages:
```
Source  Event                  Ch  Data
 28:0   Note on                 0, note 60, velocity 62
 28:0   Note off                0, note 60, velocity 0
 28:0   Program change          0, program 0
 28:0   Control change          0, controller 101, value 0
 28:0   Control change          0, controller 100, value 1
 28:0   Control change          0, controller 6, value 64
```
The Control changes decode to sending value 64 to Registered Parameter Number (RPN) 1 - ie reset the pitch.
The Program Change to program 0 is sent regardless of the instrument selection button pressed (and same effect using the selector knob).

